INTRODUCI'ION. xiii

their capital. Other bordes soon followed in rapid
succession: the Cenomani establishing themselves
lower down the Po, and founding Verona and Brixia:
the Boii, who crossed the Po and settled on the
right bank, with Bononia as their chief town; and
lastly the sentnes, who went still further south,
and settled along the coast of the Adriatic, as far
, as Ancona.

The effect of these incursions was that the Etrusci,
who originally inhabited the vast plain watered by
the Po, were driven across the Apennines and con-
fined to Etruria. Τ116 Celtic swarms still continued
to press onwards, the Senones even advancing as far
as Clusium, in the heart of Etruria (391 B.C.). The
Clusians appealed to Rome for aid—an appeal which
ultimately led to the battle of the Allia and the
capture of Rome. We hear of many subsequent
incursions of the Gauls into Latium, and even into
Campania, but they were rather of the nature of
plundering forays on a large scale, and though
they spread terror among the inhabitants of Italy,
they left no permanent mark on the history of the
country.

The disaster at the Allia, the capture of Rome, and
the subsequent incursions of the Gauls‚ disastrous as
they were at the time, doubtless did more good than
harm to Rome, inasmuch as she came to be recognised
as the champion of the civilised nations of Italy

